README.md, before:

# ce

This is a curses-based editor written in Crystal that attempts to duplicate
the functionality of my MicroEMACS variant.  There is no good reason for me
to create such a thing, since MicroEMACS is smaller, faster, and more portable.
I'm doing it simply for my own amusement and education.

As of the time of this writing (2026-02-06), `ce` implements enough
MicroEMACS functionality to perform basic editing, including undo,
keyboard macros, and Ruby extensions.  My hope is that the Crystal
code will be easier to understand and modify than the C code in MicroEMACS.

## Installation

Build `ce` using this command:

```
make
```

Then copy the resulting binary file `ce` to some place in your PATH.

`ce` requires no external shards (Crystal libraries).  It does require
the `ncurses-dev` or `ncurses-devel` packages for your Linux distro.

## Usage

For the most part, you can use the MicroEMACS documentation as a guide
for `ce` usage.  But here are some notes about `ce` that might be helpful.

### Missing Features

The following features from my MicroEMACS variant are missing in `ce`, but
I may add them as needed:

* the ability to name macros or save them in text form
* profiles (loadable macros in text form)
* mark rings (I have never used this feature)
* line numbers
* frames (for multiple native windows)
* cscope support
* upper- and lower-case a region (I have never used this feature)
* incremental search (I have never used this feature)
* a few other little-used commands

### Command Line

`ce` takes zero or more filenames as command line arguments.  It will read
all of the files, creating a buffer for each one.  It will create as many windows for the files as will fit
on the screen.  You can still navigate to the buffers that don't have a window
by using the `F8` key.

You can append a line number reference of the form `:line:column` to each filename, telling `ce`
to move the cursor to that point in the file.  The `line` and `column` are 1-based, and
the `:column` is optional.  For example, this command will open the file `src/buffer.cr`
and move to line 50, column 10:

```
ce src/buffer.cr:50:10
```

For compatibility with older programs such as `cscope`, you can also
specify a line number by preceding a filename with a `+line`
argument.  For example, this command will open the file
`src/buffer.cr` and move to line 50:

```
ce +50 src/buffer.cr
```

### Commands

`ce` implements a large subset of MicroEMACS commands.  See the section **Key Bindings**
below for a complete list of commands.  If you find yourself stuck while using `ce`, and
don't have time to look at the **Key Bindings** section, here are the most useful key
combos:

* `F1`: wait for a key, then display the command bound to that key
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-K`: display all key bindings 
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-S` or `F2`: save current file
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-V` or `F3`: open a file
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-C` or `F4`: exit the editor
* `Ctrl-X` `2`: split the window
* `Ctrl-X` `N`: move to the next window
* `Ctrl-X` `1`: make the current window the only window
* `F8`: move to the next buffer
* `F5`: undo

Using `Ctrl-G` at any prompt will abort the entry.

### Differences from MicroEMACS

The commands in `ce` perform nearly identically to those in MicroEMACS, but
there are some minor differences:

* When the spell commands encounter a misspelled word, they pop up a window
showing the suggested replacements.  Then they prompt you to enter your
own replacement, or type the number of one of the suggested replacements.

* Autocompletion for prompts: use the Tab key twice in a row (instead of the '?' key)
to pop up a window showing the possible completions.  Also, autocompletions
for filenames automatically choose a file if there's only one choice, instead
of waiting for you to confirm.

* The `file-write` command prompts you to confirm overwriting an existing file.

### Ruby Extensions

`ce` supports Ruby extensions using the same RPC system that I
implemented in MicroEMACS.  For this to work, use `sudo` to copy
`ruby/server.rb` from my MicroEMACS repository to the directory
`/usr/local/share/pe` (create that directory if it does not exist).
Then copy the desired Ruby extension from the `ruby` directory in my
MicroEMACS repository to `.pe.rb` in your working directory.

### Key Bindings

Here is a complete list of the key bindings in `ce`.  `C-` indicates
a Ctrl key combo; `M-` indicates an `Esc` key prefix; and `C-X` indicates
a `Ctrl X` prefix.

```
Backspace        back-del-char
C-@              set-mark
C-A              goto-bol
C-B              back-char
C-D              forw-del-char
C-E              goto-eol
C-F              forw-char
C-G              abort
C-J              ruby-indent
C-K              kill-line
C-L              refresh
C-N              forw-line
C-O              ins-nl-and-backup
C-P              back-line
C-R              back-search
C-S              forw-search
C-T              twiddle
C-V              forw-page
C-W              kill-region
C-X (            start-macro
C-X )            end-macro
C-X +            balance-windows
C-X 1            only-window
C-X 2            split-window
C-X =            display-position
C-X B            use-buffer
C-X C-B          display-buffers
C-X C-C          quit
C-X C-K          display-bindings
C-X C-N          down-window
C-X C-P          up-window
C-X C-Q          toggle-readonly
C-X C-S          file-save
C-X C-V          file-visit
C-X C-W          file-write
C-X C-X          swap-dot-and-mark
C-X C-Z          shrink-window
C-X E            execute-macro
C-X G            goto-line
C-X I            spell-region
C-X N            forw-window
C-X P            back-window
C-X Return       echo
C-X U            undo
C-X X            xec
C-X Z            enlarge-window
C-Y              yank
C-Z              back-page
Del              forw-del-char
Down             forw-line
F1               help
F2               file-save
F3               file-visit
F4               quit
F5               undo
F6               ruby-string
F7               redo
F8               next-buffer
F9               search-again
Home             goto-bol
Kend             goto-eol
Left             back-char
M-!              reposition-window
M-$              spell-word
M-+              indent-region
M-/              reg-replace
M-<              goto-bob
M->              goto-eob
M-?              reg-query-replace
M-B              back-word
M-Backspace      back-del-word
M-C              cap-word
M-C-E            gccerr
M-C-F            fold-case
M-C-R            back-regexp-search
M-C-S            forw-regexp-search
M-D              forw-del-word
M-F              forw-word
M-I              set-save-tabs
M-J              fill-paragraph
M-L              lower-word
M-P              search-paren
M-Q              query-replace
M-R              replace-string
M-Tab            set-tab-size
M-U              upper-word
M-W              copy-region
M-X              extended-command
M-[              back-paragraph
M-]              forw-paragraph
M-{              back-paragraph
Pgdn             forw-page
Pgup             back-page
Return           ins-nl
Right            forw-char
Up               back-line
```

Commit message:

Add a note to the README about crystal docs.
FossilOrigin-Name: bcc7f726983a126700495f4268f8472bf4e934071778d8672916651d06dc8f55

README.md, after:

# ce

This is a curses-based editor written in Crystal that attempts to duplicate
the functionality of my MicroEMACS variant.  There is no good reason for me
to create such a thing, since MicroEMACS is smaller, faster, and more portable.
I'm doing it simply for my own amusement and education.

As of the time of this writing (2026-02-06), `ce` implements enough
MicroEMACS functionality to perform basic editing, including undo,
keyboard macros, and Ruby extensions.  My hope is that the Crystal
code will be easier to understand and modify than the C code in MicroEMACS.

## Installation

Build `ce` using this command:

```
make
```

Then copy the resulting binary file `ce` to some place in your PATH.

`ce` requires no external shards (Crystal libraries).  It does require
the `ncurses-dev` or `ncurses-devel` packages for your Linux distro.

To make nicely formatted API documentation for the classes and methods
in `ce`, use this command:

```
make docs
```

or this command:

```
crystal docs
```

To view the API documentation, use this command:

```
make viewdocs
```

or this command:

```
xdg-open docs/index.html
```

## Usage

For the most part, you can use the MicroEMACS documentation as a guide
for `ce` usage.  But here are some notes about `ce` that might be helpful.

### Missing Features

The following features from my MicroEMACS variant are missing in `ce`, but
I may add them as needed:

* the ability to name macros or save them in text form
* profiles (loadable macros in text form)
* mark rings (I have never used this feature)
* line numbers in the display
* frames (for multiple native windows)
* cscope support
* upper- and lower-case a region (I have never used this feature)
* incremental search (I have never used this feature)
* a few other little-used commands

### Command Line

`ce` takes zero or more filenames as command line arguments.  It will read
all of the files, creating a buffer for each one.  It will create as many windows for the files as will fit
on the screen.  You can still navigate to the buffers that don't have a window
by using the `F8` key.

You can append a line number reference of the form `:line:column` to each filename, telling `ce`
to move the cursor to that point in the file.  The `line` and `column` are 1-based, and
the `:column` is optional.  For example, this command will open the file `src/buffer.cr`
and move to line 50, column 10:

```
ce src/buffer.cr:50:10
```

For compatibility with older programs such as `cscope`, you can also
specify a line number by preceding a filename with a `+line`
argument.  For example, this command will open the file
`src/buffer.cr` and move to line 50:

```
ce +50 src/buffer.cr
```

### Commands

`ce` implements a large subset of MicroEMACS commands.  See the section **Key Bindings**
below for a complete list of commands.  If you find yourself stuck while using `ce`, and
don't have time to look at the **Key Bindings** section, here are the most useful key
combos:

* `F1`: wait for a key, then display the command bound to that key
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-K`: display all key bindings 
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-S` or `F2`: save current file
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-V` or `F3`: open a file
* `Ctrl-X` `Ctrl-C` or `F4`: exit the editor
* `Ctrl-X` `2`: split the window
* `Ctrl-X` `N`: move to the next window
* `Ctrl-X` `1`: make the current window the only window
* `F8`: move to the next buffer
* `F5`: undo

Using `Ctrl-G` at any prompt will abort the entry.

### Differences from MicroEMACS

The commands in `ce` perform nearly identically to those in MicroEMACS, but
there are some minor differences:

* When the spell commands encounter a misspelled word, they pop up a window
showing the suggested replacements.  Then they prompt you to enter your
own replacement, or type the number of one of the suggested replacements.

* Autocompletion for prompts: use the Tab key twice in a row (instead of the '?' key)
to pop up a window showing the possible completions.  Also, autocompletions
for filenames automatically choose a file if there's only one choice, instead
of waiting for you to confirm.

* The `file-write` command prompts you to confirm overwriting an existing file.

### Ruby Extensions

`ce` supports Ruby extensions using the same RPC system that I
implemented in MicroEMACS.  For this to work, use `sudo` to copy
`ruby/server.rb` from my MicroEMACS repository to the directory
`/usr/local/share/pe` (create that directory if it does not exist).
Then copy the desired Ruby extension from the `ruby` directory in my
MicroEMACS repository to `.pe.rb` in your working directory.

### Key Bindings

Here is a complete list of the key bindings in `ce`.  `C-` indicates
a Ctrl key combo; `M-` indicates an `Esc` key prefix; and `C-X` indicates
a `Ctrl X` prefix.

```
Backspace        back-del-char
C-@              set-mark
C-A              goto-bol
C-B              back-char
C-D              forw-del-char
C-E              goto-eol
C-F              forw-char
C-G              abort
C-J              ruby-indent
C-K              kill-line
C-L              refresh
C-N              forw-line
C-O              ins-nl-and-backup
C-P              back-line
C-R              back-search
C-S              forw-search
C-T              twiddle
C-V              forw-page
C-W              kill-region
C-X (            start-macro
C-X )            end-macro
C-X +            balance-windows
C-X 1            only-window
C-X 2            split-window
C-X =            display-position
C-X B            use-buffer
C-X C-B          display-buffers
C-X C-C          quit
C-X C-K          display-bindings
C-X C-N          down-window
C-X C-P          up-window
C-X C-Q          toggle-readonly
C-X C-S          file-save
C-X C-V          file-visit
C-X C-W          file-write
C-X C-X          swap-dot-and-mark
C-X C-Z          shrink-window
C-X E            execute-macro
C-X G            goto-line
C-X I            spell-region
C-X N            forw-window
C-X P            back-window
C-X Return       echo
C-X U            undo
C-X X            xec
C-X Z            enlarge-window
C-Y              yank
C-Z              back-page
Del              forw-del-char
Down             forw-line
F1               help
F2               file-save
F3               file-visit
F4               quit
F5               undo
F6               ruby-string
F7               redo
F8               next-buffer
F9               search-again
Home             goto-bol
Kend             goto-eol
Left             back-char
M-!              reposition-window
M-$              spell-word
M-+              indent-region
M-/              reg-replace
M-<              goto-bob
M->              goto-eob
M-?              reg-query-replace
M-B              back-word
M-Backspace      back-del-word
M-C              cap-word
M-C-E            gccerr
M-C-F            fold-case
M-C-R            back-regexp-search
M-C-S            forw-regexp-search
M-D              forw-del-word
M-F              forw-word
M-I              set-save-tabs
M-J              fill-paragraph
M-L              lower-word
M-P              search-paren
M-Q              query-replace
M-R              replace-string
M-Tab            set-tab-size
M-U              upper-word
M-W              copy-region
M-X              extended-command
M-[              back-paragraph
M-]              forw-paragraph
M-{              back-paragraph
Pgdn             forw-page
Pgup             back-page
Return           ins-nl
Right            forw-char
Up               back-line
```
