www/implementation.md, before:

# Implementation Notes

`ce`, being a port of MicroEMACS, has a very similar structure.  The function names,
command names, and data structures are all identical or very close.  The chief
differences are the line and position structures.

## MicroEMACS

Here are some notes about data structures in MicroEMACS.

### Line

In MicroEMACS, buffers are linked lists of lines.  Each line contains a forward
link, a backward link, and a character buffer. This structure is allocated as a single unit.
This means that if the character buffer must be enlarged, an entirely new line structure
must be allocated, and the characters copied from the old line to the new line.
Then the old line must be deallocated.  Finally, all pointers to the changed line
line must be updated. This includes pointers in the next and previous lines, but also pointers in
the window structures.

### Window

A window contains several pointers to lines in its associated buffer: the "dot";
the "mark"; and "line", which is a pointer to the line being displayed on the top
row of the window.  When a line in the associated buffer is reallocated, all
of these pointers in the window structure must be checked in case one of them
pointed to the line that is now deallocated.

The use of line pointers complicates several other things:

1. Determining the distance between two lines.
2. Moving a certain number of lines backwards or forwards from a given line.
3. Determing the number of lines in a list.

These calculations require loops that step through the linked list of lines.
Item #1 is especially complicated, because given two line pointers,
it is not known immediately which line comes first in the list.  To determine
the ordering, MicroEMACS scans forwards and backwards simultaneously from
one of the lines until it hits the other line.

### Display

When MicroEMACS was written, back in the mid 1980s, many computers used
serial terminals running at 9600 baud (960 characters per second) as
consoles, while other computers, like the IBM PC, used memory-mapped
displays.  At that time, display description languages like
termcap or terminfo, or display abstraction libraries like curses or ncurses did
not exist except on Unix workstations.  To handle this
diversity, MicroEMACS placed display-specific code in separate modules,
and the type of display supported was specified at build time.

The display update code kept a virtual screen that had to be copied to
the physical screen regularly.  For memory-mapped displays, the update
code was a simple memory to-memory copy.  For serial terminals, the
update code was much more complex: it had to take into account the
slowness of transferring characters to the terminal, so it had to
minimize the amount of copying.  It did this by peppering the code in
many places with hints to the display code about what it needed to
update.  Hints would say things like, "a line was edited, so don't
redraw the whole screen", or "so much has changed that we need to redraw
everything." The update code also used a complex algorithm invented by
James Gosling to calculate the fastest way to do an update.

Over time, I removed the complex update code for serial terminals,
and standardized on the ncursesw library, which provides an interface
that lets MicroEMACS pretend that the display is memory mapped. Ncursesw
maintains its own virtual screen, and uses its own optimization algorithms
to update the physical screen.

## CrystalEdit

Here are some notes about data structures in `ce`.

### Line

In `ce`, as in MicroEMACS, buffers are linked lists of lines, and a line
contains forward and backwards links.  But the character buffer in a line
is allocated separately from the links.  This means that if the characters
are changed, the links don't change.  This greatly simplifies operations
that operate on a single line.

In `ce`, positions are not stored as line pointers;
they are stored as line numbers.  This reduces calculations involving
distances between two lines to simple arithmetic.  However,
it complicates the mapping of a line number to a line pointer.
The brute force method involves scanning the entire linked list
until the *n*th line is found, which is a very expensive operation.

To improve the efficiency, `ce` uses a cache (a hash) of line pointers, indexed
by line numbers.  This works well until lines are added to or deleted
from a list.  Then much of the cache becomes invalid, because line numbers
after the deleted or added line are now wrong.  Because the cache isn't
ordered by line number, it must be cleared in these situations.

To prevent this from being a total disaster, `ce` tries to keep at least
one, or possibly two lines in the cache after an add or delete.  It also
handles the common cases of looking up line numbers that are one line
before after after a line already in the cache.  In those cases, `ce`
merely has to use a forward or backward link from the cached line to
get to the desired line.

### Window

As mentioned earlier, positions in `ce` are stored as line numbers.
This includes the dot, mark, and line attributes of windows.
But care has to be taken to ensure these line numbers are updated properly
when a line is inserted or deleted.  Fortunately, that is an easy
operation, which involves adding or subtracting one to line numbers
that were after the line being added or deleted.

### Display

As mentioned above, I moved the display update code in MicroEMACS
to a simplified model that used the ncursesw library.  In `ce`, I also
used ncursesw, but I simplified things even further by eliminating
the redundant virtual screen that MicroEMACS uses in its display
code.  As a result, `ce` lets ncursesw do all of the work maintaining
virtual and physical screens, and optimizing the update
from virtual to physical.

Commit message:

Add a block diagram to the implementation notes.
FossilOrigin-Name: 3b2eb241f22abaa4e4455cbf4dbb78b6ebc10e9f7242f92f6e56eaed1339a155

www/implementation.md, after:

# Implementation Notes

`ce`, being a port of MicroEMACS, has a very similar structure.  The function names,
command names, and data structures are all identical or very close.  The chief
differences are the line and position structures.

## MicroEMACS

Here are some notes about data structures in MicroEMACS.

### Line

In MicroEMACS, buffers are linked lists of lines.  Each line contains a forward
link, a backward link, and a character buffer. This structure is allocated as a single unit.
This means that if the character buffer must be enlarged, an entirely new line structure
must be allocated, and the characters copied from the old line to the new line.
Then the old line must be deallocated.  Finally, all pointers to the changed line
line must be updated. This includes pointers in the next and previous lines, but also pointers in
the window structures.

### Window

A window contains several pointers to lines in its associated buffer: the "dot";
the "mark"; and "line", which is a pointer to the line being displayed on the top
row of the window.  When a line in the associated buffer is reallocated, all
of these pointers in the window structure must be checked in case one of them
pointed to the line that is now deallocated.

The use of line pointers complicates several other things:

1. Determining the distance between two lines.
2. Moving a certain number of lines backwards or forwards from a given line.
3. Determing the number of lines in a list.

These calculations require loops that step through the linked list of lines.
Item #1 is especially complicated, because given two line pointers,
it is not known immediately which line comes first in the list.  To determine
the ordering, MicroEMACS scans forwards and backwards simultaneously from
one of the lines until it hits the other line.

This diagram shows the relationship between a window, its buffer,
and the screen.

```
 Screen                                                         Buffer
+--------+                                              +-----------------+
|class S>|                                              | Declaration of  |
|  def l>|                                              |  Independence   |
|  end   |               Window                         |When in the      |
| MicroE>|mode line  /  +-----------------+             |course of        |
|human e>| <- toprow |  |human events,    | line --->   |human events,    |
|it beco>|           |  |it becomes       |             |it becomes       |
|necessa>|           |  |necessary for    |             |necessary for    |
|one peo>|cursor     |  |one people to    | dot.l--->   |one people to    |
|dissolv>|           |  |dissolve the     |             |dissolve the     |
|politic>|       nrow|  |political bands  |             |political bands  | 
|which h>|           |  |which have       |             |which have       |
|connect>|           |  |connected them   |             |connected them   |
|with an>|           |  |with another,    |             |with another,    |
|and to >|           |  |and to assume    |             |and to assume    |
|among t>|           |  |among the powers |             |among the powers |
| MicroE>|mode line  \  +-----------------+             |of the earth,    |
|        |echo line                                     |the separate and |
+--------+                                              |equal station to |
                                                        |which the Laws   |
                                                        |of Nature and of |
                                                        |  ......         |
                                                        +-----------------+
```

### Display

When MicroEMACS was written, back in the mid 1980s, many computers used
serial terminals running at 9600 baud (960 characters per second) as
consoles, while other computers, like the IBM PC, used memory-mapped
displays.  At that time, display description languages like
termcap or terminfo, or display abstraction libraries like curses or ncurses did
not exist except on Unix workstations.  To handle this
diversity, MicroEMACS placed display-specific code in separate modules,
and the type of display supported was specified at build time.

The display update code kept a virtual screen that had to be copied to
the physical screen regularly.  For memory-mapped displays, the update
code was a simple memory to-memory copy.  For serial terminals, the
update code was much more complex: it had to take into account the
slowness of transferring characters to the terminal, so it had to
minimize the amount of copying.  It did this by peppering the code in
many places with hints to the display code about what it needed to
update.  Hints would say things like, "a line was edited, so don't
redraw the whole screen", or "so much has changed that we need to redraw
everything." The update code also used a complex algorithm invented by
James Gosling to calculate the fastest way to do an update.

Over time, I removed the complex update code for serial terminals,
and standardized on the ncursesw library, which provides an interface
that lets MicroEMACS pretend that the display is memory mapped. Ncursesw
maintains its own virtual screen, and uses its own optimization algorithms
to update the physical screen.

## CrystalEdit

Here are some notes about data structures in `ce`.

### Line

In `ce`, as in MicroEMACS, buffers are linked lists of lines, and a line
contains forward and backwards links.  But the character buffer in a line
is allocated separately from the links.  This means that if the characters
are changed, the links don't change.  This greatly simplifies operations
that operate on a single line.

In `ce`, positions are not stored as line pointers;
they are stored as line numbers.  This reduces calculations involving
distances between two lines to simple arithmetic.  However,
it complicates the mapping of a line number to a line pointer.
The brute force method involves scanning the entire linked list
until the *n*th line is found, which is a very expensive operation.

To improve the efficiency, `ce` uses a cache (a hash) of line pointers, indexed
by line numbers.  This works well until lines are added to or deleted
from a list.  Then much of the cache becomes invalid, because line numbers
after the deleted or added line are now wrong.  Because the cache isn't
ordered by line number, it must be cleared in these situations.

To prevent this from being a total disaster, `ce` tries to keep at least
one, or possibly two lines in the cache after an add or delete.  It also
handles the common cases of looking up line numbers that are one line
before after after a line already in the cache.  In those cases, `ce`
merely has to use a forward or backward link from the cached line to
get to the desired line.

### Window

As mentioned earlier, positions in `ce` are stored as line numbers.
This includes the dot, mark, and line attributes of windows.
But care has to be taken to ensure these line numbers are updated properly
when a line is inserted or deleted.  Fortunately, that is an easy
operation, which involves adding or subtracting one to line numbers
that were after the line being added or deleted.

### Display

As mentioned above, I moved the display update code in MicroEMACS
to a simplified model that used the ncursesw library.  In `ce`, I also
used ncursesw, but I simplified things even further by eliminating
the redundant virtual screen that MicroEMACS uses in its display
code.  As a result, `ce` lets ncursesw do all of the work maintaining
virtual and physical screens, and optimizing the update
from virtual to physical.
